README.md, before:

# Overview #

The purpose of this project is to create a complete example of how MLFlow can be used in an end to end Model Management setting. Databricks comes with MLFlow auto-tracking, which is partially replicated here for use outside of Databricks.

Basic EDA using custom spark describe + pandas_profiling:

1. Custom spark describe + EDA: [./source/data_exploration.py](./source/data_exploration.py)
2. Pandas-profiling report: [./reports/overview.html](./reports/overview.html)

Stratified TrainTestSplit in Spark (missing out of the box)

Demonstration of how to use MLFlow to:
1. Log nested runs with Spark MLlib vectorizers and CrossValidation / GridSearch outside of Databricks
2. Grid search for pyspark.ml.classification classifiers: Works with all Spark MLlib classifiers, however, only the below have been tested.
    - GradientBoostedTrees 
    - LinearSVC
    - RandomForestClassifier
    - Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) (Spark MLlib does not expose training parameters in trained model, params not logged in MLFlow)
    - LogisticRegression
3. Random search for pyspark.ml.classification classifiers: Works with all Spark MLlib classifiers, however, only the below have been tested.
    - GradientBoostedTrees 
    - LinearSVC
    - RandomForestClassifier
    - Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) (Spark MLlib does not expose training parameters in trained model, params not logged in MLFlow)
    - LogisticRegression
4. Log nested runs with Genetic Algorithm for Hyperparameter Optimization instead of GridSearch (_TBD_)
5. Predict with a saved model via a script. [./source/test_API.py](./source/test_API.py) 
6. Create a microservice API of the model:
    - via terminal (_TBD_)
    - dockerized service [./source/predict.py](./source/predict.py) (_TBD_)

Other features:
1. Performance optimizations:
    - Paralellized cross validation to use 80% of CPUs (CPUs = threaded logical cores or 2x physical cores)
    - Vectorize once rather than during each cross-validation (_finished_) re-integrating the vectorizer pipeline with model pipeline until after training is complete (_TBD_)

### Configure conda/miniconda ###

If you haven't already done so, add conda-forge as a channel
```
conda config --add channels conda-forge
conda config --set channel_priority false
```
Create the environment:
```
conda create --name spark_mlflow python=3.7 jupyter pandas-profiling pyspark pyarrow mlflow unittest
```

### Download the sample data: ###

```
python source/get_data.py 
```
## MLFlow UI ###

### To run ad-hoc, execute the following in the terminal within the folder of the project: ###
```
conda activate spark_mlflow
mlflow ui
```
### To start MLFlow UI in the background instead to run indefinitely: ###
_Assumes NodeJS and npm are installed_
http://pm2.keymetrics.io/docs/usage/quick-start/

1. Install PM2 (process manager)
    ```
    npm install pm2@latest -g
    # or 
    yarn global add pm2
    ```
2. Start mlflow:
    ```
    pm2 start mlflow.sh
    # check logs for succesfull initialization:
    pm2 logs mlflow.sh
    ```
    _mlflow.sh must have execution rights_
3. If you want MLFlow UI to start on every reboot:
    ```
    pm2 save
    pm2 startup
    ```

## Example ##

Using demographic data to predict if the income is above or below 50K

### Vectorization ###

```python
categorical_cols = [
    'workclass', 'education', 'education-num', 'marital-status', 'occupation',
    'relationship', 'race', 'sex', 'native-country'
]

scaling_cols = [
    'age', 'fnlwgt', 'capital-gain', 'capital-loss', 'hours-per-week'
]

#create vectorizer model and transform df
vectorizer, transformed_df = SparkMethods.vectorizer(
    df,
    labels_to_vectorize={'income': 'OneHotEncoderEstimator'},
    CategoricalCols=categorical_cols,
    MinMaxCols=scaling_cols)
transformed_df.show()
```
![alt text](docs/images/vectorizer.png)

### Stratified train/test split ###

```python
# Split the data into training and test sets (30% held out for testing)
strata_cols = ['income', 'sex']
trainingData, testData = SparkMethods.train_test_split(
    transformed_df,
    strata_cols,
    trainRatio=0.7,
    show_summary=True)
```

|      strata|train_count|test_count|test_%|
|------------|-----------|----------|------|
| >50K,Female|        825|       354|   0.3|
|  <=50K,Male|      10589|      4539|   0.3|
|<=50K,Female|       6714|      2878|   0.3|
|   >50K,Male|       4663|      1999|   0.3|


## MLFlow Grid Search with a single classifier: GradientBoostedTrees ##

This grid search has 54 combinations tested on 5 folds. If you have a regular laptop, try using fewer hyperparameter options before visualizing which settings work best using the MLFlow UI to tweak and repeat.

```python
grid_params = {
    'GBTClassifier':{
        'maxDepth': [1,5,7],
        'maxBins': [8,16,32],
        'maxIter': [25,50],
        'stepSize': [0.15,0.2,0.3]
    }
}

results = SparkMLBinaryClassifierGridSearch(
    trainingData,
    testData,
    evaluator='MulticlassClassificationEvaluator',
    label_col='label',
    features_col='features',
    kfolds=5,
    grid_params=grid_params)
```

### MLFlow to analyze best hyperparameters for further optimization ###

Selecting all runs and comparing the results we see that:

__maxBins:__ There is an upward trend in F1Score as we increase the number of bins.

![alt text](docs/images/maxBins.png)

__maxIter:__ Not much gain with twice as many iterations.

![alt text](docs/images/maxIter.png)

__maxDepth:__ depth of 5 performs better than 1 or 7. We could try 4,5,6 next.

![alt text](docs/images/maxDepth.png)

__stepSize:__ The smaller stepSize of 0.15 yielded some models with better results and with greater variability in results.

![alt text](docs/images/stepSize.png)

Filtering to see testF1Scores > 0.86 and consistent with the above, we can conclude that maxBins of 8 and 16 don't need to be attempted again and maxDepth of 1 can be ignored as well. Adding more bins would help since the best scores were all with the most bins.

![alt text](docs/images/filterTestF1Score.png)

![alt text](docs/images/parallelCoordinatesPlot.png)

### Adjust the parameters based on the above findings and run another experiment: ###

```python
grid_params = {
        'GBTClassifier':{
        'maxDepth': [4,5,6],
        'maxBins': [32,40,48],
        'maxIter': [25],
        'stepSize': [0.15]
    }
}

results = SparkMLBinaryClassifierGridSearch(
    trainingData,
    testData,
    evaluator='MulticlassClassificationEvaluator',
    label_col='label',
    features_col='features',
    kfolds=5,
    grid_params=grid_params)
```

### Selecting the new runs we see that: ###

__maxBins:__ Continues to improve slightly with more bins but is not getting past 70% F1Score of 1.0. Other algorithms should be tested and potentially ensembled.

![alt text](docs/images/maxBins2.png)

![alt text](docs/images/maxBins2F1Score1.png)

__maxDepth:__ Depth of 5 is optimal.

![alt text](docs/images/maxDepth2.png)

## MLFlow Grid Search with multiple classifiers ##

Works with all Spark MLlib classifiers, however, only the below have been tested.

```python
models = SparkMLBinaryClassifierGridSearch(
    trainingData,
    testData)
```

Default parameters (same as above):
```python
models = SparkMLBinaryClassifierGridSearch(trainingData, testData,
            evaluator='MulticlassClassificationEvaluator',
            labelCol='label',
            featuresCol='features',
            kfolds=5,
            grid_params={
                'GBTClassifier':{
                    'maxDepth': [3, 5, 7],
                    'maxBins': [8, 16, 32],
                    'maxIter': [25, 50, 100],
                    'stepSize': [0.15, 0.2, 0.25],
                },
                'LinearSVC':{
                    'standardization': [True, False],
                    'aggregationDepth': [2, 5, 7],
                    'regParam': [0.1, 1, 10],
                    'maxIter': [25, 50, 100],
                    'tol': [1e-6, 1e-4, 1e-2]
                },
                'MultilayerPerceptronClassifier' : {
                    'num_hidden_layers': range(1,5),
                    'first_hidden_layer_size': range(2,21,4), 
                    'blockSize': [2, 5, 10],
                    'stepSize': [0.001, 0.01, 0.1],
                    'maxIter': [25, 50],
                    'tol': [1e-6, 1e-4, 1e-2]
                },
                'LogisticRegression' : {
                    'standardization': [True],
                    'aggregationDepth': [5, 10],
                    'regParam': [0.001, 0.01],
                    'maxIter': [25],
                    'threshold':[0.5],
                    'elasticNetParam': [0.0, 0.5, 1.0],
                    'tol': [1e-6, 1e-4]
                },
                'RandomForestClassifier' : {
                    'maxDepth': [3, 5, 7],
                    'maxBins': [16, 32],
                    'minInfoGain': [0.0, 0.05],
                    'impurity': ['gini', 'entropy']
                }
            })
```
![alt text](docs/images/MultiAlgorithmGridSearchF1Score.png)

## MLFlow Random Search with multiple classifiers ##

Works with all Spark MLlib classifiers, however, only the below have been tested.

```python
models = SparkMLBinaryClassifierRandomSearch(
    trainingData,
    testData)
```

Default parameters (same as above):
```python
models = SparkMLBinaryClassifierRandomSearch(
    trainingData,
    testData,
    random_grid_size=50,
    evaluator='MulticlassClassificationEvaluator',
    labelCol='label',
    featuresCol='features',
    kfolds=5,
    grid_params={
        'GBTClassifier': {
            'maxDepth': [3, 5, 7, 9],
            'maxBins': [8, 16, 32, 48, 64],
            'maxIter': [25, 50, 75],
            'stepSize': [0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25]
        },
        'LinearSVC': {
            'standardization': [True, False],
            'aggregationDepth': [2, 5, 7, 10],
            'regParam': [0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10.0],
            'maxIter': [25, 50, 75],
            'tol': [1e-06, 0.0001, 0.01]
        },
        'MultilayerPerceptronClassifier': {
            'num_hidden_layers': range(1, 5),
            'first_hidden_layer_size': range(2, 21, 4),
            'blockSize': [2, 5, 10],
            'stepSize': [0.001, 0.01, 0.1],
            'maxIter': [25, 50, 75],
            'tol': [1e-06, 0.0001, 0.01]
        },
        'LogisticRegression': {
            'standardization': [True, False],
            'aggregationDepth': [2, 5, 7, 10],
            'regParam': [0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10.0],
            'maxIter': [25, 50, 75],
            'threshold': [0.4, 0.5, 0.6],
            'elasticNetParam': [0.0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0],
            'tol': [1e-06, 0.0001, 0.01]
        },
        'RandomForestClassifier': {
            'maxDepth': [3, 5, 7, 9],
            'maxBins': [8, 16, 32, 48, 64],
            'minInfoGain': [0.0, 0.05, 0.1],
            'impurity': ['gini', 'entropy']
        }
    })
```
![alt text](docs/images/MultiAlgorithmRandomF1Score.png)

Commit message:

Add known issues and future changes

README.md, after:

# Overview #

The purpose of this project is to create a complete example of how MLFlow can be used in an end to end Model Management setting. Databricks comes with MLFlow auto-tracking, which is partially replicated here for use outside of Databricks.

Basic EDA using custom spark describe + pandas_profiling:

1. Custom spark describe + EDA: [./source/data_exploration.py](./source/data_exploration.py)
2. Pandas-profiling report: [./reports/overview.html](./reports/overview.html)

Stratified TrainTestSplit in Spark (missing out of the box)

Demonstration of how to use MLFlow to:
1. Log nested runs with Spark MLlib vectorizers and CrossValidation / GridSearch outside of Databricks
2. Grid search for pyspark.ml.classification classifiers: Works with all Spark MLlib classifiers, however, only the below have been tested.
    - GradientBoostedTrees 
    - LinearSVC
    - RandomForestClassifier
    - Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) (Spark MLlib does not expose training parameters in trained model, params not logged in MLFlow)
    - LogisticRegression
3. Random search for pyspark.ml.classification classifiers: Works with all Spark MLlib classifiers, however, only the below have been tested.
    - GradientBoostedTrees 
    - LinearSVC
    - RandomForestClassifier
    - Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) (Spark MLlib does not expose training parameters in trained model, params not logged in MLFlow)
    - LogisticRegression
4. Log nested runs with Genetic Algorithm for Hyperparameter Optimization instead of GridSearch (_TBD_)
5. Predict with a saved model via a script. [./source/test_API.py](./source/test_API.py) 
6. Create a microservice API of the model:
    - via terminal (_TBD_)
    - dockerized service [./source/predict.py](./source/predict.py) (_TBD_)

Other features:
1. Performance optimizations:
    - Paralellized cross validation to use 80% of CPUs (CPUs = threaded logical cores or 2x physical cores)
    - Vectorize once rather than during each cross-validation (_finished_) re-integrating the vectorizer pipeline with model pipeline until after training is complete (_TBD_)

Known issues (to be changed/fixed in release 2.0):
1. Metrics and parameters are logged for all K-folds instead of all hyperparameter combinations multiplying the results (3 kfolds multiplies the results by 3). This will be changed to log only the results of each hyperparameter combination trained on the full training dataset. The best model will still be the one chosen by the crossValidator to reduce overfitting.
2. Unit tests are just basic tests to see if the script runs, this will be changed to be true unit tests with logical assertions based on an expected output from a small dataset.
3. The parameter "MulticlassClassificationEvaluator" is just a placeholder to avoid breaking changes when the "BinaryClassificationEvaluator" is added.

### Configure conda/miniconda ###

If you haven't already done so, add conda-forge as a channel
```
conda config --add channels conda-forge
conda config --set channel_priority false
```
Create the environment:
```
conda create --name spark_mlflow python=3.7 jupyter pandas-profiling pyspark pyarrow mlflow unittest
```

### Download the sample data: ###

```
python source/get_data.py 
```
## MLFlow UI ###

### To run ad-hoc, execute the following in the terminal within the folder of the project: ###
```
conda activate spark_mlflow
mlflow ui
```
### To start MLFlow UI in the background instead to run indefinitely: ###
_Assumes NodeJS and npm are installed_
http://pm2.keymetrics.io/docs/usage/quick-start/

1. Install PM2 (process manager)
    ```
    npm install pm2@latest -g
    # or 
    yarn global add pm2
    ```
2. Start mlflow:
    ```
    pm2 start mlflow.sh
    # check logs for succesfull initialization:
    pm2 logs mlflow.sh
    ```
    _mlflow.sh must have execution rights_
3. If you want MLFlow UI to start on every reboot:
    ```
    pm2 save
    pm2 startup
    ```

## Example ##

Using demographic data to predict if the income is above or below 50K

### Vectorization ###

```python
categorical_cols = [
    'workclass', 'education', 'education-num', 'marital-status', 'occupation',
    'relationship', 'race', 'sex', 'native-country'
]

scaling_cols = [
    'age', 'fnlwgt', 'capital-gain', 'capital-loss', 'hours-per-week'
]

#create vectorizer model and transform df
vectorizer, transformed_df = SparkMethods.vectorizer(
    df,
    labels_to_vectorize={'income': 'OneHotEncoderEstimator'},
    CategoricalCols=categorical_cols,
    MinMaxCols=scaling_cols)
transformed_df.show()
```
![alt text](docs/images/vectorizer.png)

### Stratified train/test split ###

```python
# Split the data into training and test sets (30% held out for testing)
strata_cols = ['income', 'sex']
trainingData, testData = SparkMethods.train_test_split(
    transformed_df,
    strata_cols,
    trainRatio=0.7,
    show_summary=True)
```

|      strata|train_count|test_count|test_%|
|------------|-----------|----------|------|
| >50K,Female|        825|       354|   0.3|
|  <=50K,Male|      10589|      4539|   0.3|
|<=50K,Female|       6714|      2878|   0.3|
|   >50K,Male|       4663|      1999|   0.3|


## MLFlow Grid Search with a single classifier: GradientBoostedTrees ##

This grid search has 54 combinations tested on 5 folds. If you have a regular laptop, try using fewer hyperparameter options before visualizing which settings work best using the MLFlow UI to tweak and repeat.

```python
grid_params = {
    'GBTClassifier':{
        'maxDepth': [1,5,7],
        'maxBins': [8,16,32],
        'maxIter': [25,50],
        'stepSize': [0.15,0.2,0.3]
    }
}

results = SparkMLBinaryClassifierGridSearch(
    trainingData,
    testData,
    evaluator='MulticlassClassificationEvaluator',
    label_col='label',
    features_col='features',
    kfolds=5,
    grid_params=grid_params)
```

### MLFlow to analyze best hyperparameters for further optimization ###

Selecting all runs and comparing the results we see that:

__maxBins:__ There is an upward trend in F1Score as we increase the number of bins.

![alt text](docs/images/maxBins.png)

__maxIter:__ Not much gain with twice as many iterations.

![alt text](docs/images/maxIter.png)

__maxDepth:__ depth of 5 performs better than 1 or 7. We could try 4,5,6 next.

![alt text](docs/images/maxDepth.png)

__stepSize:__ The smaller stepSize of 0.15 yielded some models with better results and with greater variability in results.

![alt text](docs/images/stepSize.png)

Filtering to see testF1Scores > 0.86 and consistent with the above, we can conclude that maxBins of 8 and 16 don't need to be attempted again and maxDepth of 1 can be ignored as well. Adding more bins would help since the best scores were all with the most bins.

![alt text](docs/images/filterTestF1Score.png)

![alt text](docs/images/parallelCoordinatesPlot.png)

### Adjust the parameters based on the above findings and run another experiment: ###

```python
grid_params = {
        'GBTClassifier':{
        'maxDepth': [4,5,6],
        'maxBins': [32,40,48],
        'maxIter': [25],
        'stepSize': [0.15]
    }
}

results = SparkMLBinaryClassifierGridSearch(
    trainingData,
    testData,
    evaluator='MulticlassClassificationEvaluator',
    label_col='label',
    features_col='features',
    kfolds=5,
    grid_params=grid_params)
```

### Selecting the new runs we see that: ###

__maxBins:__ Continues to improve slightly with more bins but is not getting past 70% F1Score of 1.0. Other algorithms should be tested and potentially ensembled.

![alt text](docs/images/maxBins2.png)

![alt text](docs/images/maxBins2F1Score1.png)

__maxDepth:__ Depth of 5 is optimal.

![alt text](docs/images/maxDepth2.png)

## MLFlow Grid Search with multiple classifiers ##

Works with all Spark MLlib classifiers, however, only the below have been tested.

```python
models = SparkMLBinaryClassifierGridSearch(
    trainingData,
    testData)
```

Default parameters (same as above):
```python
models = SparkMLBinaryClassifierGridSearch(trainingData, testData,
            evaluator='MulticlassClassificationEvaluator',
            labelCol='label',
            featuresCol='features',
            kfolds=5,
            grid_params={
                'GBTClassifier':{
                    'maxDepth': [3, 5, 7],
                    'maxBins': [8, 16, 32],
                    'maxIter': [25, 50, 100],
                    'stepSize': [0.15, 0.2, 0.25],
                },
                'LinearSVC':{
                    'standardization': [True, False],
                    'aggregationDepth': [2, 5, 7],
                    'regParam': [0.1, 1, 10],
                    'maxIter': [25, 50, 100],
                    'tol': [1e-6, 1e-4, 1e-2]
                },
                'MultilayerPerceptronClassifier' : {
                    'num_hidden_layers': range(1,5),
                    'first_hidden_layer_size': range(2,21,4), 
                    'blockSize': [2, 5, 10],
                    'stepSize': [0.001, 0.01, 0.1],
                    'maxIter': [25, 50],
                    'tol': [1e-6, 1e-4, 1e-2]
                },
                'LogisticRegression' : {
                    'standardization': [True],
                    'aggregationDepth': [5, 10],
                    'regParam': [0.001, 0.01],
                    'maxIter': [25],
                    'threshold':[0.5],
                    'elasticNetParam': [0.0, 0.5, 1.0],
                    'tol': [1e-6, 1e-4]
                },
                'RandomForestClassifier' : {
                    'maxDepth': [3, 5, 7],
                    'maxBins': [16, 32],
                    'minInfoGain': [0.0, 0.05],
                    'impurity': ['gini', 'entropy']
                }
            })
```
![alt text](docs/images/MultiAlgorithmGridSearchF1Score.png)

## MLFlow Random Search with multiple classifiers ##

Works with all Spark MLlib classifiers, however, only the below have been tested.

```python
models = SparkMLBinaryClassifierRandomSearch(
    trainingData,
    testData)
```

Default parameters (same as above):
```python
models = SparkMLBinaryClassifierRandomSearch(
    trainingData,
    testData,
    random_grid_size=50,
    evaluator='MulticlassClassificationEvaluator',
    labelCol='label',
    featuresCol='features',
    kfolds=5,
    grid_params={
        'GBTClassifier': {
            'maxDepth': [3, 5, 7, 9],
            'maxBins': [8, 16, 32, 48, 64],
            'maxIter': [25, 50, 75],
            'stepSize': [0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25]
        },
        'LinearSVC': {
            'standardization': [True, False],
            'aggregationDepth': [2, 5, 7, 10],
            'regParam': [0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10.0],
            'maxIter': [25, 50, 75],
            'tol': [1e-06, 0.0001, 0.01]
        },
        'MultilayerPerceptronClassifier': {
            'num_hidden_layers': range(1, 5),
            'first_hidden_layer_size': range(2, 21, 4),
            'blockSize': [2, 5, 10],
            'stepSize': [0.001, 0.01, 0.1],
            'maxIter': [25, 50, 75],
            'tol': [1e-06, 0.0001, 0.01]
        },
        'LogisticRegression': {
            'standardization': [True, False],
            'aggregationDepth': [2, 5, 7, 10],
            'regParam': [0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10.0],
            'maxIter': [25, 50, 75],
            'threshold': [0.4, 0.5, 0.6],
            'elasticNetParam': [0.0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0],
            'tol': [1e-06, 0.0001, 0.01]
        },
        'RandomForestClassifier': {
            'maxDepth': [3, 5, 7, 9],
            'maxBins': [8, 16, 32, 48, 64],
            'minInfoGain': [0.0, 0.05, 0.1],
            'impurity': ['gini', 'entropy']
        }
    })
```
![alt text](docs/images/MultiAlgorithmRandomF1Score.png)
